# AWS 101 for Seismology

This tutorial will walk you thought getting on an AWS cloud instance from the ground up.

## What is Cloud Computing

Here will we post the google slides of the basics of Cloud computing (Naomi and Rob).

Here we will post the youtube video of the deonstration.

## Web Console Access

### **Before the 2023 workshop**:
1. log in with your designated IAM User to this console: https://806812320051.signin.aws.amazon.com/console
2. Choose the username that was decided by you and the workshop admin (IAM user nae account). 
3. As a first log in, the auto generated password will need to be replaced. Use a sophisticated password to confirm with AWS security standards.

### Choosing a region

An important aspect of cloud is that the computing and data centers are distributed around the world and labeled as "regions". For fastest connection to data storage on S3, we strongly recommend to choose the region where the data is. For instance, the AWS open data sets 

To choose a region in AWS, follow these steps:

1. Log in to your AWS Management Console.
2. In the top-right corner, click on the current region name (e.g., "US East (N. Virginia)").
3. In the dropdown menu that appears, select a region (e.g. "US West (Oregon)").
4. After selecting the region, all AWS services you use will be hosted in that region.

### Launching an instance
Launch an instance using EC2 (Elastic Computing Cloud). Follow the steps below. Screen shots of the steps are linked [here](url for google slides)


1. Choose a default **instance OS**: ``Amazon linux``
2. **Name and tags**: Be specific for best job anaageent: ``FirstName_LastName_jobname``
3. **Instance type**: t2.micro
4. **Key pair**: create a new key pair. Download the .pem file, move it to a location that you can have access to and remember where it is. If the file does not save as .pem, replace the extension with .pem. If you use a windows computer, you might need a ppk
5. Use **existing security group**, use default.
6. In **Advanced Details**, choose a ``spot instance``.
6. The rest is default and **launch it**.

Now the instance is launched, use the console to check.
7. View instance, click on it -> Right click ->  connect -> SSH client. We will only go through step 3 and the
8. Change the permission to your local PEM/PPK file to only readibly to you. Use terminal and change the permission by going into the folder where the PEM/PPK file:

```bash
chmod 400 file.pem
```

9. Copy the ssh link command in the folder where the PEM file is below and ssh to the instance:

```bash
ssh -i "file.pem" ec2-user@ec2.IPADDRESS
```

To start from scratch, copy paste these commands in the terminal. 
You can copy the lines all at once and install it. 
```bash
sudo yum install -y git docker
wget https://repo.anaconda.com/miniconda/Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh
chmod +x Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh 
./Miniconda3-latest-Linux-x86_64.sh -b -p $HOME/miniconda
./miniconda/bin/conda init bash
bash
```
You can customize to save time. If ``pip`` or ``docker`` is not necessary, remove these lines.

# Installing Software

Now you can install your software! Clone your repository, install your environment, run your scripts. We will illustrate with the example 
```sh
git clone https://github.com/SeisSCOPED/seis_cloud
cd seis_cloud
conda create -y -n seiscloud python=3.8 pip
conda activate seiscloud
pip install -r requirements.txt
```
(update from github and overwrite local: git fetch + git merge)

## Download / Upload to your EC2 instance
To download from EC2: 
```sh
scp -i "your.pem" ec2-user@ec2-publicIPAddress.us-west-2.compute.amazonaws.com:/home/ec2-user/seis_cloud/file .
```

If you are on Windows: 
```bash
C:\> pscp -i yourkey.ppk ec2-user@publicDNS:/home/ubuntu/yourfilename C:\[local_destination_path]\[folder]
```

## Running Jupyter Nobooks

To get the jupyter notebook running:
```bash
jupyter notebook --ip 0.0.0.0
```

Open a browser, type the IP address of the instance (see the public Public IPv4 DNS)
Then type in the browser:
publicIPaddress:8888

You will be prompted to window and enter a token. On the EC2 terminal instance, you will see:
``http://PRIVATE_IP.us-west-2.compute.internal:8888/?token=LONG_TOKEN``

Copy and past the LONG_TOKEN in the token window and the jupyter notebook will start.

There are alternative options to login:
1. Forward the ports when login in the instance:
```bash
ssh -i "user.pem" user@publicIPaddress -L 8888:localhost:8888 -N
```
2. Open a browser and type localhost:8888/

__Warning__: we have experienced exception. Safari and Chrome may treat the connection as malware. These are warnings and can be ignored (???) and find a way to continue.

## Save the Virtual Image

You can save the image (AMI) so that you can start from there next time. This can save time and effort in setting up the instance from scratch every time.
Here are the steps to save the virtual image (AMI) of an EC2 instance in AWS:

In your AWS Management Console:
1. Navigate to the EC2 dashboard.
2. Select the EC2 instance that you want to save the image of.
3. Right-click on the instance and click on "Create Image" in the dropdown menu.
4. In the "Create Image" dialog box, enter a descriptive name for your image in the "Name" field. For this workshop, please use the format <strong>"FirstName_LastName_Image_TutorialX"</strong>.
5. Optionally, you can add a description and tags to the image for easier management later on.
6. Click on the "Create Image" button to start the image creation process.
7. Wait for the image creation process to complete. This may take several minutes depending on the size of your instance and the amount of data being saved.
8.Once the image has been created, it will appear in the "AMIs" section of the EC2 dashboard.

You have to save it every time you want to save the current state of the instance

## Using Docker on EC2

You can also run the scripts using the automatically generated Docker image. Note that if you have a Jupyter notebook running on port 8888 before starting Docker, you will need to terminate it before running Docker to avoid port conflicts.

1. Start docker
```bash
sudo systemctl start docker
```
2. Pull the image. This will pull the Docker image named seis_cloud from the GitHub Container Registry, with the specific tag f041ec0.
```bash
sudo docker pull ghcr.io/seisscoped/seis_cloud:f041ec0
```
3. Run the docker. This will run the seis_cloud image in interactive mode, and forward port 8888 from the container to port 8888 on the EC2 instance. The latest tag will pull the most recent version of the image.
```bash
sudo docker run -it -p 8888:8888 ghcr.io/seisscoped/seis_cloud:latest
```
4. You will be inside the docker container. You can now run a jupyter notebook from there. 
```bash
jupyter notebook --ip 0.0.0.0
```
5. To exit docker, simply type
```bash
exit
```

## Terminating an instance

What is the difference between stop and terminate and instance, saving data vs cost
__NOTE__: visit [here](https://docs.rightscale.com/faq/clouds/aws/Whats_the_difference_between_Terminating_and_Stopping_an_EC2_Instance.html) to read more about stopping vs terminating.
If you stop, you do not pay for the hardware, but you will pay for the EBS volume only and the data is saved in the EBS volume. If you terminate, all data will be wiped and you will cease to pay.

